Means to specify database license (#414)
Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE: optimade.rst

  - **formats**: List of available output formats.
  - **entry\_types\_by\_format**: Available entry endpoints as a function of output formats.
  - **available\_endpoints**: List of available endpoints (i.e., the string to be appended to the versioned or unversioned base URL serving the API).
  - **license**: A `JSON API links object <http://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#document-links>`__ giving a pointer to a license covering all the data and metadata provided under this database.

>     If the license is included in the `SPDX License List <https://spdx.org/licenses/>`__, then the URL MUST point to SPDX-hosted license fulltext, i.e., it MUST start with :field-val:`https://spdx.org/licenses/`, but MUST NOT include the terminating :field-val:`.html`.

Reviewer: There may be more databases besides MPDS that use a per entry licencing system. So I think it would be good to specify that in that case, the link should point to a document describing how to find the licence for each entry. Otherwise someone may fill in a null value here, because there is no server wide licence.

Author: I would suggest resolving this by explicitly stating that there is no default value/interpretation of `null` for these licensing properties. In case no pointers are provided in `license` (or `*_licenses`), this means no rights are granted for the client (as is with the [source code](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/148146/open-source-code-with-no-license-can-i-fork-it)). I do not want to entangle too much logic around this PR - there is a field for provider to put a link to their license/policies, and it is up to a provider to describe their license/policies in it.

Reviewer 2: Also, with the latest edits, the text for `license` says that the text it points to may express "(or licensing options if there are multiple)", which I think is the appropriate level of clarification about this.

Author: But maybe we need to explicitly state what missing/`null` value for `license` means too?

Reviewer 2: Sure, it does not hurt to clarify for both the fields that null/missing means "no license". But, I suppose, in particular `available_licenses` present, and `license` missing should still be interpret able.

>     Example: :field-val:`https://spdx.org/licenses/CC0-1.0`.

Reviewer 2: It isn't fully clear to me how to evaluate the "MUST point to [the] SPD-hosted license fulltext". Is this saying that if I make my data available under CC-BY-4.0 I MUST put "https://spdx.org/licenses/CC-BY-4.0" in this field? That is to say, I MUST NOT link to my own website where I say, e.g., that ~ "all the structures are indeed fully available under CC-BY-4.0, but it would also be really nice if you guys could please also cite our paper." Because, in that case I don't really like this.

I get a feeling there is an attempt here to make this field 'interpretable' if the license is a standard license. I would rather suggest pointing to `compatible_licenses` (suggested: `available_licenses`) for all client needs of a machine-readable license field.

Author: > It isn't fully clear to me how to evaluate the "MUST point to [the] SPD-hosted license fulltext". Is this saying that if I make my data available under CC-BY-4.0 I MUST put "https://spdx.org/licenses/CC-BY-4.0" in this field? That is to say, I MUST NOT link to my own website where I say, e.g., that ~ "all the structures are indeed fully available under CC-BY-4.0, but it would also be really nice if you guys could please also cite our paper." Because, in that case I don't really like this.

Yes, this was my intention here. I understand the need to specify other usage guidelines, but I see these as a separate thing, provided a standard license is used.

> I get a feeling there is an attempt here to make this field 'interpretable' if the license is a standard license. I would rather suggest pointing to `compatible_licenses` (suggested: `available_licenses`) for all client needs of a machine-readable license field.

Yes, having a machine-readable way to specify a license was my intention. But I agree your suggestion of better relying on `compatible_licenses`/`available_licenses` is more natural here.

Author: As I accepted your change suggestions, I mark this as resolved now.

  :field:`attributes` MAY also include the following OPTIONAL fields:

  - **is\_index**: if :field-val:`true`, this is an index meta-database base URL (see section `Index Meta-Database`_).

    If this member is *not* provided, the client MUST assume this is **not** an index meta-database base URL (i.e., the default is for :field:`is_index` to be :field-val:`false`).

>   - **compatible\_licenses**: List of SPDX license identifiers giving licenses that the data and metadata in a database is compatible with.
>     In case the data and metadata is multiply-licensed, identifiers of these multiple licenses SHOULD be provided to let clients know under which conditions the data and metadata could be used.
>     If :field:`license` and :field:`compatible_licenses` contradict, :field:`compatible_licenses` has precedence.

Reviewer 2: Based on our Workshop discussion on this and Wikipedia's "definition" of what license compatibility means, I don't think "compatible licenses" is the right term. For this to work, this field simply is a list of licenses that the database owner grant you the data under. So, how about naming it `available_licenses`? 

Also, if there ever was a time to be overly verbose for clarity in this text, this is it; so I suggest adding a bit of text to try to make the commitment of including something in this field more stringently clear.

```suggestion
  - **available\_licenses**: List of SPDX license identifiers specifying a set of alternative licenses under which the client is granted access to the data and metadata in this database.
    Inclusion of a license identifier in the list is a commitment of the database that the rights are in place to grant clients access to all the data and metadata according to the terms of these licenses.
    If the licensing information provided via the field :field:`license` omits licensing options specified in :field:`available_licenses`, or if it otherwise contradicts them, a client MUST still be allowed to interpret the inclusion of a license in :field:`available_licenses` as a full commitment from the database that the data and metadata is available, without exceptions, under the respective licenses.
    If the database cannot make that commitment, e.g., if only part of the data is available under a license, the corresponding license identifier MUST NOT appear in :field:`available_licenses` (but, rather, the field :field:`license` is to be used to clarify the licensing situation.)
    In case the data and metadata is multiply-licensed, identifiers of these multiple licenses SHOULD be provided to let clients know under which conditions the data and metadata can be used.
```

Reviewer 2: @merkys But, this semantic difference is exactly the point. To be meaningful, this field needs to mean that the copyright owner of the database is willing to allow you to use the data under any one of these licenses which is closer to ~= "licenses used by this database" than "licenses compatible with the usage of data in this database" with the accepted meaning of "license compatibility".

I think this is a point we probably should try to agree on before moving forward; because this should at least be understandable by us, if it is to be understandable by anyone else...

Author: On second thought, I guess the precise name of the property is not that much of an issue, provided the description is clear. Thus I accepted your subsequent change suggestion.

  - **formats**: List of available output formats.
  - **entry\_types\_by\_format**: Available entry endpoints as a function of output formats.
  - **available\_endpoints**: List of available endpoints (i.e., the string to be appended to the versioned or unversioned base URL serving the API).

>   - **license**: A `JSON API links object <http://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#document-links>`__ giving a pointer to a license covering all the data and metadata provided under this database.
>     If the license is included in the `SPDX License List <https://spdx.org/licenses/>`__, then the URL MUST point to SPDX-hosted license fulltext, i.e., it MUST start with :field-val:`https://spdx.org/licenses/`, but MUST NOT include the terminating :field-val:`.html`.
>     Example: :field-val:`https://spdx.org/licenses/CC0-1.0`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **license**: A `JSON API links object <http://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#document-links>`__ giving a URL to a web page containing a human-readable text describing the license (or licensing options if there are multiple) covering all the data and metadata provided in this database.
    Clients are advised not to try automated parsing of this link or its content, but rather rely on the field :field:`licenses` instead.
    Example: :field-val:`https://example.com/licenses/example_license.html`.
```

  :field:`attributes` MAY also include the following OPTIONAL fields:

  - **is\_index**: if :field-val:`true`, this is an index meta-database base URL (see section `Index Meta-Database`_).

    If this member is *not* provided, the client MUST assume this is **not** an index meta-database base URL (i.e., the default is for :field:`is_index` to be :field-val:`false`).

>   - **available\_licenses**: List of SPDX license identifiers specifying a set of alternative licenses under which the client is granted access to the data and metadata in this database.
>     Inclusion of a license identifier in the list is a commitment of the database that the rights are in place to grant clients access to all the data and metadata according to the terms of either of these licenses (at the choice of the client).
>     If the licensing information provided via the field :field:`license` omits licensing options specified in :field:`available_licenses`, or if it otherwise contradicts them, a client MUST still be allowed to interpret the inclusion of a license in :field:`available_licenses` as a full commitment from the database that the data and metadata is available, without exceptions, under the respective licenses.
>     If the database cannot make that commitment, e.g., if only part of the data is available under a license, the corresponding license identifier MUST NOT appear in :field:`available_licenses` (but, rather, the field :field:`license` is to be used to clarify the licensing situation.)
>     In case the data and metadata is multiply-licensed, identifiers of these multiple licenses SHOULD be provided to let clients know under which conditions the data and metadata can be used.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **available\_licenses**: List of `SPDX license identifiers <https://spdx.org/licenses/>` specifying a set of alternative licenses under which the client is granted access to all the data and metadata in this database.
    if the data and metadata is available under multiple alternative licenses, identifiers of these multiple licenses SHOULD be provided to let clients know under which conditions the data and metadata can be used.
    Inclusion of a license identifier in the list is a commitment of the database that the rights are in place to grant clients access to all the data and metadata according to the terms of either of these licenses (at the choice of the client).
    If the licensing information provided via the field :field:`license` omits licensing options specified in :field:`available_licenses`, or if it otherwise contradicts them, a client MUST still be allowed to interpret the inclusion of a license in :field:`available_licenses` as a full commitment from the database that the data and metadata is available, without exceptions, under the respective licenses.
    If the database cannot make that commitment, e.g., if only part of the data is available under a license, the corresponding license identifier MUST NOT appear in :field:`available_licenses` (but, rather, the field :field:`license` is to be used to clarify the licensing situation.)
        An empty list indicates that none of the SPDX licenses apply for the entirety of the database and that the licensing situation is clarified in human readable form in the field :field:`license`.
```

>     An empty list indicates that none of the SPDX licenses apply for the entirety of the database and that the licensing situation is clarified in human readable form in the field :field:`license`.

Reviewer 3: Without opening a new issue, I just wanted to clarify something here @merkys (and others). The field `license` is simply a Links object, so when you say "situtation is clarified in human readable form in the field `license`", are you referring to the content served at the URL pointed to be license, or the `meta` section of the Links object?

Reviewer: If I remember the discussion correctly, we were indeed referring to the content of the URL to which the licence link points.

Author: It is `license->href` indeed, worth clarifying.
